The Python Standard Library
***************************

While The Python Language Reference describes the exact syntax and
semantics of the Python language, this library reference manual
describes the standard library that is distributed with Python. It
also describes some of the optional components that are commonly
included in Python distributions.

Python’s standard library is very extensive, offering a wide range of
facilities as indicated by the long table of contents listed below.
The library contains built-in modules (written in C) that provide
access to system functionality such as file I/O that would otherwise
be inaccessible to Python programmers, as well as modules written in
Python that provide standardized solutions for many problems that
occur in everyday programming. Some of these modules are explicitly
designed to encourage and enhance the portability of Python programs
by abstracting away platform-specifics into platform-neutral APIs.

The Python installers for the Windows platform usually include the
entire standard library and often also include many additional
components. For Unix-like operating systems Python is normally
provided as a collection of packages, so it may be necessary to use
the packaging tools provided with the operating system to obtain some
or all of the optional components.

In addition to the standard library, there is a growing collection of
several thousand components (from individual programs and modules to
packages and entire application development frameworks), available
from the Python Package Index.

* Introduction

* Fonctions Natives

* Non-essential Built-in Functions

* Constantes natives

  * Constantes ajoutées par le module "site"

* Types natifs

  * Valeurs booléennes

  * Opérations booléennes — "and", "or", "not"

  * Comparaisons

  * Numeric Types — "int", "float", "long", "complex"

  * Les types Itérateurs

  * Sequence Types — "str", "unicode", "list", "tuple", "bytearray",
    "buffer", "xrange"

  * Types d’ensembles — "set", "frozenset"

  * Les types de correspondances — "dict"

  * File Objects

  * memoryview type

  * Le type Gestionnaire de Contexte

  * Autres types natifs

  * Attributs Spéciaux

* Built-in Exceptions

  * Exception hierarchy

* String Services

  * Opérations usuelles sur des chaînes — "string"

  * "re" — Opérations à base d’expressions rationnelles

  * "struct" — Interpret strings as packed binary data

  * "difflib" — Helpers for computing deltas

  * "StringIO" — Read and write strings as files

  * "cStringIO" — Faster version of "StringIO"

  * "textwrap" — Text wrapping and filling

  * "codecs" — Codec registry and base classes

  * "unicodedata" — Unicode Database

  * "stringprep" — Internet String Preparation

  * "fpformat" — Floating point conversions

* Data Types

  * "datetime" — Types de base pour la date et l’heure

  * "calendar" — General calendar-related functions

  * "collections" — High-performance container datatypes

  * "heapq" — Heap queue algorithm

  * "bisect" — Algorithme de bissection de listes

  * "array" — Efficient arrays of numeric values

  * "sets" — Unordered collections of unique elements

  * "sched" — Event scheduler

  * "mutex" — Mutual exclusion support

  * "Queue" — A synchronized queue class

  * "weakref" — Weak references

  * "UserDict" — Class wrapper for dictionary objects

  * "UserList" — Class wrapper for list objects

  * "UserString" — Class wrapper for string objects

  * "types" — Names for built-in types

  * "new" — Creation of runtime internal objects

  * "copy" — Shallow and deep copy operations

  * "pprint" — Data pretty printer

  * "repr" — Alternate "repr()" implementation

* Numeric and Mathematical Modules

  * "numbers" — Numeric abstract base classes

  * Fonctions mathématiques — "math"

  * Fonctions mathématiques pour nombres complexes — "cmath"

  * "decimal" — Decimal fixed point and floating point arithmetic

  * "fractions" — Rational numbers

  * "random" — Generate pseudo-random numbers

  * "itertools" — Fonctions créant des itérateurs pour boucler
    efficacement.

  * "functools" — Fonctions de haut niveau et opérations sur des
    objets appelables

  * "operator" — Standard operators as functions

* File and Directory Access

  * "os.path" — Common pathname manipulations

  * "fileinput" — Iterate over lines from multiple input streams

  * "stat" — Interpreting "stat()" results

  * "statvfs" — Constants used with "os.statvfs()"

  * "filecmp" — File and Directory Comparisons

  * "tempfile" — Generate temporary files and directories

  * "glob" — Unix style pathname pattern expansion

  * "fnmatch" — Unix filename pattern matching

  * "linecache" — Random access to text lines

  * "shutil" — High-level file operations

  * "dircache" — Cached directory listings

  * "macpath" — Mac OS 9 path manipulation functions

* Data Persistence

  * "pickle" — Python object serialization

  * "cPickle" — A faster "pickle"

  * "copy_reg" — Register "pickle" support functions

  * "shelve" — Python object persistence

  * "marshal" — Internal Python object serialization

  * "anydbm" — Generic access to DBM-style databases

  * "whichdb" — Guess which DBM module created a database

  * "dbm" — Simple « database » interface

  * "gdbm" — GNU’s reinterpretation of dbm

  * "dbhash" — DBM-style interface to the BSD database library

  * "bsddb" — Interface to Berkeley DB library

  * "dumbdbm" — Portable DBM implementation

  * "sqlite3" — DB-API 2.0 interface for SQLite databases

* Compression de donnée et archivage

  * "zlib" — Compression compatible with **gzip**

  * "gzip" — Support for **gzip** files

  * "bz2" — Compression compatible with **bzip2**

  * "zipfile" — Work with ZIP archives

  * "tarfile" — Read and write tar archive files

* Formats de fichiers

  * "csv" — Lecture et écriture de fichiers CSV

  * "ConfigParser" — Configuration file parser

  * "robotparser" —  Parser for robots.txt

  * "netrc" — netrc file processing

  * "xdrlib" — Encode and decode XDR data

  * "plistlib" — Generate and parse Mac OS X ".plist" files

* Service de Cryptographie

  * "hashlib" — Secure hashes and message digests

  * "hmac" — Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication

  * "md5" — MD5 message digest algorithm

  * "sha" — SHA-1 message digest algorithm

* Services génériques du système d’exploitation

  * "os" — Diverses interfaces pour le système d’exploitation

  * "io" — Core tools for working with streams

  * "time" — Time access and conversions

  * "argparse" – Parseur d’arguments, d’options, et de sous-
    commandes de ligne de commande

  * "optparse" — Parser for command line options

  * "getopt" — C-style parser for command line options

  * "logging" — Logging facility for Python

  * "logging.config" — Logging configuration

  * "logging.handlers" — Logging handlers

  * Saisie de mot de passe portable

  * "curses" — Terminal handling for character-cell displays

  * "curses.textpad" — Text input widget for curses programs

  * "curses.ascii" — Utilities for ASCII characters

  * "curses.panel" — A panel stack extension for curses

  * "platform" —  Access to underlying platform’s identifying data

  * "errno" — Standard errno system symbols

  * "ctypes" — A foreign function library for Python

* Optional Operating System Services

  * "select" — Waiting for I/O completion

  * "threading" — Higher-level threading interface

  * "thread" — Multiple threads of control

  * "dummy_threading" — Module de substitution au module "threading"

  * "dummy_thread" — Drop-in replacement for the "thread" module

  * "multiprocessing" — Process-based « threading » interface

  * "mmap" — Memory-mapped file support

  * "readline" — GNU readline interface

  * "rlcompleter" — Completion function for GNU readline

* Interprocess Communication and Networking

  * "subprocess" — Subprocess management

  * "socket" — Low-level networking interface

  * "ssl" — TLS/SSL wrapper for socket objects

  * "signal" — Set handlers for asynchronous events

  * "popen2" — Subprocesses with accessible I/O streams

  * "asyncore" — Gestionnaire de socket asynchrone

  * "asynchat" — Asynchronous socket command/response handler

* Traitement des données provenant d’Internet

  * "email" — An email and MIME handling package

  * "json" — Encodage et décodage JSON

  * "mailcap" — Mailcap file handling

  * "mailbox" — Manipulate mailboxes in various formats

  * "mhlib" — Access to MH mailboxes

  * "mimetools" — Tools for parsing MIME messages

  * "mimetypes" — Map filenames to MIME types

  * "MimeWriter" — Generic MIME file writer

  * "mimify" — MIME processing of mail messages

  * "multifile" — Support for files containing distinct parts

  * "rfc822" — Parse RFC 2822 mail headers

  * "base64" — RFC 3548: Base16, Base32, Base64 Data Encodings

  * "binhex" — Encode et décode les fichiers binhex4

  * "binascii" — Convert between binary and ASCII

  * "quopri" — Encode and decode MIME quoted-printable data

  * "uu" — Encode et decode les fichiers uuencode

* Outils de traitement de balises structurées

  * "HTMLParser" — Simple HTML and XHTML parser

  * "sgmllib" — Simple SGML parser

  * "htmllib" — A parser for HTML documents

  * "htmlentitydefs" — Definitions of HTML general entities

  * Modules de traitement XML

  * Vulnérabilités XML

  * "xml.etree.ElementTree" — The ElementTree XML API

  * "xml.dom" — The Document Object Model API

  * "xml.dom.minidom" — Minimal DOM implementation

  * "xml.dom.pulldom" — Support for building partial DOM trees

  * "xml.sax" — Support for SAX2 parsers

  * "xml.sax.handler" — Base classes for SAX handlers

  * "xml.sax.saxutils" — SAX Utilities

  * "xml.sax.xmlreader" — Interface for XML parsers

  * "xml.parsers.expat" — Fast XML parsing using Expat

* Gestion des Protocols Internet

  * "webbrowser" — Convenient Web-browser controller

  * "cgi" — Common Gateway Interface support

  * "cgitb" — Traceback manager for CGI scripts

  * "wsgiref" — WSGI Utilities and Reference Implementation

  * "urllib" — Open arbitrary resources by URL

  * "urllib2" — extensible library for opening URLs

  * "httplib" — HTTP protocol client

  * "ftplib" — FTP protocol client

  * "poplib" — POP3 protocol client

  * "imaplib" — IMAP4 protocol client

  * "nntplib" — NNTP protocol client

  * "smtplib" — SMTP protocol client

  * "smtpd" — SMTP Server

  * "telnetlib" — Telnet client

  * "uuid" — UUID objects according to RFC 4122

  * "urlparse" — Parse URLs into components

  * "SocketServer" — A framework for network servers

  * "BaseHTTPServer" — Basic HTTP server

  * "SimpleHTTPServer" — Simple HTTP request handler

  * "CGIHTTPServer" — CGI-capable HTTP request handler

  * "cookielib" — Cookie handling for HTTP clients

  * "Cookie" — HTTP state management

  * "xmlrpclib" — XML-RPC client access

  * "SimpleXMLRPCServer" — Basic XML-RPC server

  * "DocXMLRPCServer" — Self-documenting XML-RPC server

* Services Multimedia

  * "audioloop" — Manipulation de données audio brutes

  * "imageop" — Manipulate raw image data

  * "aifc" — Lis et écrit dans les fichiers AIFF et AIFC

  * "sunau" — Read and write Sun AU files

  * "wave" — Read and write WAV files

  * "chunk" — Read IFF chunked data

  * "colorsys" — Conversions between color systems

  * "imghdr" — Determine the type of an image

  * "sndhdr" — Determine type of sound file

  * "ossaudiodev" — Access to OSS-compatible audio devices

* Internationalization

  * "gettext" — Services d’internationalisation multilingue

  * "locale" — Internationalization services

* Program Frameworks

  * "cmd" — Interpréteurs en ligne de commande.

  * "shlex" — Simple lexical analysis

* Graphical User Interfaces with Tk

  * "Tkinter" — Python interface to Tcl/Tk

  * "ttk" — Tk themed widgets

  * "Tix" — Extension widgets for Tk

  * "ScrolledText" — Scrolled Text Widget

  * "turtle" — Turtle graphics for Tk

  * IDLE

  * Other Graphical User Interface Packages

* Outils de développement

  * "pydoc" — Documentation generator and online help system

  * "doctest" — Test interactive Python examples

  * "unittest" — Unit testing framework

  * 2to3 - Automatise la traduction du code de Python 2 vers Python
    3

  * "test" — Regression tests package for Python

  * "test.support" — Utility functions for tests

* Débogger et profiler

  * "bdb" — Framework de débogage

  * "pdb" — The Python Debugger

  * Debugger Commands

  * The Python Profilers

  * "hotshot" — High performance logging profiler

  * "timeit" — Measure execution time of small code snippets

  * "trace" — Trace or track Python statement execution

* Paquets et distribution de paquets logiciels

  * "distutils" — Building and installing Python modules

  * "ensurepip" — Bootstrapping the "pip" installer

* Python Runtime Services

  * "sys" — Paraètres et fonctions propres à des systèmes

  * "sysconfig" — Provide access to Python’s configuration
    information

  * "__builtin__" — Objets natifs

  * "future_builtins" — Python 3 builtins

  * "__main__" — Environnement premier du script

  * "warnings" — Warning control

  * "contextlib" — Utilities for "with"-statement contexts

  * "abc" — Classes de Base Abstraites

  * "atexit" — Gestionnaire de fin de programme

  * "traceback" — Print or retrieve a stack traceback

  * "__future__" — Définitions des futurs

  * "gc" — Garbage Collector interface

  * "inspect" — Inspect live objects

  * "site" — Site-specific configuration hook

  * "user" — User-specific configuration hook

  * "fpectl" — Floating point exception control

* Custom Python Interpreters

  * "code" — Interpreter base classes

  * "codeop" — Compile Python code

* Restricted Execution

  * "rexec" — Restricted execution framework

  * "Bastion" — Restricting access to objects

* Importing Modules

  * "imp" — Access the "import" internals

  * "importlib" — Convenience wrappers for "__import__()"

  * "imputil" — Import utilities

  * "zipimport" — Import modules from Zip archives

  * "pkgutil" — Package extension utility

  * "modulefinder" — Find modules used by a script

  * "runpy" — Locating and executing Python modules

* Python Language Services

  * "parser" — Access Python parse trees

  * "ast" — Arbre Syntaxique Abstrait

  * "symtable" — Access to the compiler’s symbol tables

  * "symbol" — Constants used with Python parse trees

  * "token" — Constants used with Python parse trees

  * "keyword" — Testing for Python keywords

  * "tokenize" — Tokenizer for Python source

  * "tabnanny" — Detection of ambiguous indentation

  * "pyclbr" — Python class browser support

  * "py_compile" — Compile Python source files

  * "compileall" — Byte-compile Python libraries

  * "dis" — Disassembler for Python bytecode

  * "pickletools" — Tools for pickle developers

* Python compiler package

  * The basic interface

  * Limitations

  * Python Abstract Syntax

  * Using Visitors to Walk ASTs

  * Bytecode Generation

* Services Divers

  * "formatter" — Generic output formatting

* MS Windows Specific Services

  * "msilib" — Read and write Microsoft Installer files

  * "msvcrt" — Useful routines from the MS VC++ runtime

  * "_winreg" — Windows registry access

  * "winsound" — Sound-playing interface for Windows

* Services spécifiques à Unix

  * "posix" — The most common POSIX system calls

  * "pwd" — The password database

  * "spwd" — The shadow password database

  * "grp" — The group database

  * "crypt" — Function to check Unix passwords

  * "dl" — Call C functions in shared objects

  * "termios" — POSIX style tty control

  * "tty" — Terminal control functions

  * "pty" — Pseudo-terminal utilities

  * "fcntl" — The "fcntl" and "ioctl" system calls

  * "pipes" — Interface to shell pipelines

  * "posixfile" — File-like objects with locking support

  * "resource" — Resource usage information

  * "nis" — Interface to Sun’s NIS (Yellow Pages)

  * "syslog" — Unix syslog library routines

  * "commands" — Utilities for running commands

* Mac OS X specific services

  * "ic" — Access to the Mac OS X Internet Config

  * "MacOS" — Access to Mac OS interpreter features

  * "macostools" — Convenience routines for file manipulation

  * "findertools" — The **finder**’s Apple Events interface

  * "EasyDialogs" — Basic Macintosh dialogs

  * "FrameWork" — Interactive application framework

  * "autoGIL" — Global Interpreter Lock handling in event loops

  * Mac OS Toolbox Modules

  * "ColorPicker" — Color selection dialog

* MacPython OSA Modules

  * "gensuitemodule" — Generate OSA stub packages

  * "aetools" — OSA client support

  * "aepack" — Conversion between Python variables and AppleEvent
    data containers

  * "aetypes" — AppleEvent objects

  * "MiniAEFrame" — Open Scripting Architecture server support

* SGI IRIX Specific Services

  * "al" — Audio functions on the SGI

  * "AL" — Constants used with the "al" module

  * "cd" — CD-ROM access on SGI systems

  * "fl" — FORMS library for graphical user interfaces

  * "FL" — Constants used with the "fl" module

  * "flp" — Functions for loading stored FORMS designs

  * "fm" — *Font Manager* interface

  * "gl" — *Graphics Library* interface

  * "DEVICE" — Constants used with the "gl" module

  * "GL" — Constants used with the "gl" module

  * "imgfile" — Support for SGI imglib files

  * "jpeg" — Read and write JPEG files

* SunOS Specific Services

  * "sunaudiodev" — Access to Sun audio hardware

  * "SUNAUDIODEV" — Constants used with "sunaudiodev"

* Undocumented Modules

  * Miscellaneous useful utilities

  * Platform specific modules

  * Multimedia

  * Undocumented Mac OS modules

  * Obsolete

  * SGI-specific Extension modules
